# October 4, 2023 - Writing Grammar for the Language

The grammar for this language is still a work in progress but it includes a
majority of the building blocks for basic programming languages and is heavily
inspired by Python's syntax.

## Statements
Statements are
defined by
```
statements:
	| statements statement
	| statement

statement:
	| assignment ';'
	| if_stmt
	| while_stmt
```
The nonterminal `statements` allow for there to be multiple statements using
left-recursion. I'm not sure if it should be using right-recursion instead, but
I'm pretty sure left-recursion should produce the right result since statements
that occur earlier should be deeper in the tree.

So far there are three basic statements, assignments, `if` statements, and
`while` statements. 

### Assignment Statements
Assignment statements are easily defined by just one production
```
assignment:
	| ID ':' type '=' block
	| ID ':' type '=' expression
```
The nonterminal `type` is still undefined as I'm not sure how I want to handle
primitive and custom types, if there even are going to be custom types.
Nonterminals `block` and `expression` will be discussed later.

### `if` and `while`-statements
`if` and `while` statements are defined by
```
if_stmt:
	| 'if' expression block elif_stmt
	| 'if' expression block else_stmt
	| 'if' expression block

elif_stmt:
	| 'elif' expression block elif_stmt
	| 'elif' expression block else_stmt
	| 'elif' expression block

elif_stmt:
	| 'else' expression block

while_stmt:
	| 'while' expression block
```
which is almost exactly Python's grammar. You may notice that it is missing a
`:` after the each conditional expression. This is needed in Python's grammar to
be able to differentiate the conditional expression and the next statement
inside of the `if` statement. However, block statements in this language are
encapsulated with curly brackets, `{}`. Blocks will be further discussed later.

### Where are the `for`-loops???
`for`-loops are a little tricky to implement. I've noticed that there are two
approaches of implementing them. The classical 
```
for(int i = 0; i < n; i++) { }
```
and the modern
```
for i in iterator { }
```

One goal of this language is to be beginner-friendly. The modern approach seems
to more popular in langauges considered to be beginner-friendly. However, this
approach comes at the cost of having to implement iterators just for its basic
use case of looping through a sequence of numbers. Python uses the `range()`
function for this use case. Rust has a built in range syntax: `start..end`. I am
still undecided as to how I will approach this problem so for now `for`-loops
are undefined.


### Block Statements
Blocks are defined by
```
block:
	| '{' statements '}'
	| '{' expression '}'
	| '{' statements expression '}'
```
The motivation behind this is that I want users to be able to create block
expressions as they seem useful. They can return values from the block so you
can write things such as
```python
success = 0
result = bool({success += 1; foo()} and
			  {success += 1; bar()} and
			  {sucesss += 1; baz()})
```
which feels a lot neater than
```python
sucess = 0

result = foo()
if result:
	result = bar()
	success += 1

if result:
	result = baz()
	success += 1

if result:
	success += 1
```

Similar to Rust, if statements would also be able to assign variables.
```Python
result = if foo() {
	"foo"
} elif bar() {
	"bar"
} else {
	"baz"
}
```
Although Python does have ternary operators, they don't look quite as neat.
For `while`-loops, semantic analysis will simply have to enforce that the block
expressions has to return nothing, similar to Rust.


### Expressions
Expressions are made up of atoms, arithmetic, bitwise, comparison, and logic
operators. 
```
# Logic operators
# ---------------
logic_or:
	| logic_or '||' logic_and

logic_and:
	| logic_and '&&' logic_not

logic_not:
	| 'not' logic_not
	| comparison

# Comparison operators
# --------------------
comparison:
	| bitwise_or '==' bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or '!=' bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or '>=' bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or '>'  bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or '<=' bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or '<'  bitwise_or
	| bitwise_or

# Bitwise operators
# -----------------
bitwise_or:
	| bitwise_or '|' bitwise_xor
	| bitwise_xor

bitwise_xor:
	| bitwise_xor '^' bitwise_and
	| bitwise_and

bitwise_and:
	| bitwise_and '&' bitwise_shift
	| bitwise_shift

bitwise_shift:
	| bitwise_shift '<<' sum
	| bitwise_shift '>>' sum
	| sum

# Arithmetic operators
# --------------------
sum : sum '+' term
	| sum '-' term
	| term

term: term '*' factor
	| term '/' factor
	| term '%' factor
	| factor

factor:
	| '+' factor
	| '-' factor
	| '~' factor
	| atom

atom:
	| '(' expression ')'
	| NUMBER
	| 'true'
	| 'false'
	| ID
```
I followed Python's grammar for expressions and changed some of the
grammar I found redundant. The precedence for the operators remain the same. One
notable difference is that comparison chaining isn't allowed. I found it to be
too ambiguous and a little complicated as to how I'd implement that. I'm also
still not one hundred percent confident in the grammar for expressions as I
haven't fully investigated as to how it works yet.
